PREFACE. XXXV

having died without an heir. This, too, is referred for
dehberation with the Prior. It would be interesting to
know the result of the Prior's deliberation on this point.
The law, in 45 Edw. 111.‚ had been decided to be against
such a grant (see Litt. ἕξ 33, 34).

In an Appendix to the text is printed “ A Boous os
Susvsronn and an abstract out of the rentalc of all the
Laudes Tenementes and Revenews that belongs to the
Cathedrall’ Churche of Durism' with the perfect and
perticuler State theros mayd anno Reginae Elizabethae
vicissimo secunde, 1580.”

The original MS. from which this Survey is printed is
also preserved in the Treasury of the Dean and Chapter
of Durham. In the Survey will be found all the vills
mentioned in the Halmote Rolls, besides many other
places from which the Dean and Chapter derived their
revenues, not mentioned in the Rolls‚ and presumably
in no way connected with the Halmote Court. This
valuable and interesting record throws much light on
the relations of the then recently founded Dean and
Chapter towards their tenants, as compared with the
relations we have seen existing between the Prior and
the tenants of the conventual body. Α review of the
Halmote Rolls leaves no room for doubt that the tenants,
other than those of the demesne lands, during the period
covered by the text, had a recognised tenant-right in
their holdings which was ripening into a customary
frechold estate ; and we might have expected to find in
the vills or townships, in which the Dean and Chapter

possessed manorial rights, the natural outcome of this
tenant-right in the existence of copyhold or customary

 

